The Project Gutenberg Etext of Peter Bell the Third, by Percy Bysshe Shelley
#3 in our series by Percy Bysshe Shelley

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg file.

We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your own disk,
thereby keeping an electronic path open for future readers.

Please do not remove this.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the information
they need to understand what they may and may not do with the etext.
To encourage this, we have moved most of the information to the end,
rather than having it all here at the beginning.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541
Find out about how to make a donation at the bottom of this file.



Title: Peter Bell the Third

Author: Percy Bysshe Shelley

Release Date: November, 2003 [Etext #4697]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on March 3, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Peter Bell the Third, by Percy Bysshe Shelley
************This file should be named ptbll10.txt or ptbll10.zip************

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, ptbll11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, ptbll10a.txt

Produced by Sue Asscher <asschers@dingoblue.net.au>


Project Gutenberg Etexts are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep etexts in compliance with any particular paper edition.

The "legal small print" and other information about this book
may now be found at the end of this file.  Please read this
important information, as it gives you specific rights and
tells you about restrictions in how the file may be used.











PETER BELL THE THIRD.

BY MICHING MALLECHO, ESQ.

 Is it a party in a parlour,
 Crammed just as they on earth were crammed,
 Some sipping punch--some sipping tea;
 But, as you by their faces see,
 All silent, and all--damned!
 "Peter Bell", by W. WORDSWORTH.

 OPHELIA.--What means this, my lord?
 HAMLET.--Marry, this is Miching Mallecho; it means mischief.
 SHAKESPEARE.


DEDICATION.

TO THOMAS BROWN, ESQ., THE YOUNGER, H.F.

DEAR TOM--Allow me to request you to introduce Mr. Peter Bell to the
respectable family of the Fudges. Although he may fall short of those
very considerable personages in the more active properties which
characterize the Rat and the Apostate, I suspect that even you, their
historian, will confess that he surpasses them in the more peculiarly
legitimate qualification of intolerable dulness.

You know Mr. Examiner Hunt; well--it was he who presented me to two of
the Mr. Bells. My intimacy with the younger Mr. Bell naturally sprung
from this introduction to his brothers. And in presenting him to you, I
have the satisfaction of being able to assure you that he is
considerably the dullest of the three.

There is this particular advantage in an acquaintance with any one of
the Peter Bells, that if you know one Peter Bell, you know three Peter
Bells; they are not one, but three; not three, but one. An awful
mystery, which, after having caused torrents of blood, and having been
hymned by groans enough to deafen the music of the spheres, is at length
illustrated to the satisfaction of all parties in the theological world,
by the nature of Mr. Peter Bell.

Peter is a polyhedric Peter, or a Peter with many sides. He changes
colours like a chameleon, and his coat like a snake. He is a Proteus of
a Peter. He was at first sublime, pathetic, impressive, profound; then
dull; then prosy and dull; and now dull--oh so very dull! it is an
ultra-legitimate dulness.

You will perceive that it is not necessary to consider Hell and the
Devil as supernatural machinery. The whole scene of my epic is in 'this
world which is'--so Peter informed us before his conversion to "White
Obi"--

'The world of all of us, AND WHERE
WE FIND OUR HAPPINESS, OR NOT AT ALL.'

Let me observe that I have spent six or seven days in composing this
sublime piece; the orb of my moonlike genius has made the fourth part of
its revolution round the dull earth which you inhabit, driving you mad,
while it has retained its calmness and its splendour, and I have been
fitting this its last phase 'to occupy a permanent station in the
literature of my country.'

Your works, indeed, dear Tom, sell better; but mine are far superior.
The public is no judge; posterity sets all to rights.

Allow me to observe that so much has been written of Peter Bell, that
the present history can be considered only, like the Iliad, as a
continuation of that series of cyclic poems, which have already been
candidates for bestowing immortality upon, at the same time that they
receive it from, his character and adventures. In this point of view I
have violated no rule of syntax in beginning my composition with a
conjunction; the full stop which closes the poem continued by me being,
like the full stops at the end of the Iliad and Odyssey, a full stop of
a very qualified import.

Hoping that the immortality which you have given to the Fudges, you will
receive from them; and in the firm expectation, that when London shall
be an habitation of bitterns; when St. Paul's and Westminster Abbey
shall stand, shapeless and nameless ruins, in the midst of an unpeopled
marsh; when the piers of Waterloo Bridge shall become the nuclei of
islets of reeds and osiers, and cast the jagged shadows of their broken
arches on the solitary stream, some transatlantic commentator will be
weighing in the scales of some new and now unimagined system of
criticism, the respective merits of the Bells and the Fudges, and their
historians. I remain, dear Tom, yours sincerely,

MICHING MALLECHO.

December 1, 1819.


P.S.--Pray excuse the date of place; so soon as the profits of the
publication come in, I mean to hire lodgings in a more respectable
street.


 PROLOGUE.

 Peter Bells, one, two and three,
 O'er the wide world wandering be.--
 First, the antenatal Peter,
 Wrapped in weeds of the same metre,
 The so-long-predestined raiment                                 _5
 Clothed in which to walk his way meant
 The second Peter; whose ambition
 Is to link the proposition,
 As the mean of two extremes--
 (This was learned from Aldric's themes)                         _10
 Shielding from the guilt of schism
 The orthodoxal syllogism;
 The First Peter--he who was
 Like the shadow in the glass
 Of the second, yet unripe,                                      _15
 His substantial antitype.--

 Then came Peter Bell the Second,
 Who henceforward must be reckoned
 The body of a double soul,
 And that portion of the whole                                   _20
 Without which the rest would seem
 Ends of a disjointed dream.--
 And the Third is he who has
 O'er the grave been forced to pass
 To the other side, which is,--                                  _25
 Go and try else,--just like this.

 Peter Bell the First was Peter
 Smugger, milder, softer, neater,
 Like the soul before it is
 Born from THAT world into THIS.                                 _30
 The next Peter Bell was he,
 Predevote, like you and me,
 To good or evil as may come;
 His was the severer doom,--
 For he was an evil Cotter,                                      _35
 And a polygamic Potter.
 And the last is Peter Bell,
 Damned since our first parents fell,
 Damned eternally to Hell--
 Surely he deserves it well!                                     _40


 PART 1.

 DEATH.

 1.
 And Peter Bell, when he had been
 With fresh-imported Hell-fire warmed,
 Grew serious--from his dress and mien
 'Twas very plainly to be seen
 Peter was quite reformed.                                       _5

 2.
 His eyes turned up, his mouth turned down;
 His accent caught a nasal twang;
 He oiled his hair; there might be heard
 The grace of God in every word
 Which Peter said or sang.                                       _10

 3.
 But Peter now grew old, and had
 An ill no doctor could unravel:
 His torments almost drove him mad;--
 Some said it was a fever bad--
 Some swore it was the gravel.                                   _15

 4.
 His holy friends then came about,
 And with long preaching and persuasion
 Convinced the patient that, without
 The smallest shadow of a doubt,
 He was predestined to damnation.                                _20

 5.
 They said--'Thy name is Peter Bell;
 Thy skin is of a brimstone hue;
 Alive or dead--ay, sick or well--
 The one God made to rhyme with hell;
 The other, I think, rhymes with you.                            _25

 6.
 Then Peter set up such a yell!--
 The nurse, who with some water gruel
 Was climbing up the stairs, as well
 As her old legs could climb them--fell,
 And broke them both--the fall was cruel.                        _30

 7.
 The Parson from the casement lept
 Into the lake of Windermere--
 And many an eel--though no adept
 In God's right reason for it--kept
 Gnawing his kidneys half a year.                                _35

 8.
 And all the rest rushed through the door
 And tumbled over one another,
 And broke their skulls.--Upon the floor
 Meanwhile sat Peter Bell, and swore,
 And cursed his father and his mother;                           _40

 9.
 And raved of God, and sin, and death,
 Blaspheming like an infidel;
 And said, that with his clenched teeth
 He'd seize the earth from underneath,
 And drag it with him down to hell.                              _45

 10.
 As he was speaking came a spasm,
 And wrenched his gnashing teeth asunder;
 Like one who sees a strange phantasm
 He lay,--there was a silent chasm
 Between his upper jaw and under.                                _50

 11.
 And yellow death lay on his face;
 And a fixed smile that was not human
 Told, as I understand the case,
 That he was gone to the wrong place:--
 I heard all this from the old woman.                            _55

 12.
 Then there came down from Langdale Pike
 A cloud, with lightning, wind and hail;
 It swept over the mountains like
 An ocean,--and I heard it strike
 The woods and crags of Grasmere vale.                           _60

 13.
 And I saw the black storm come
 Nearer, minute after minute;
 Its thunder made the cataracts dumb;
 With hiss, and clash, and hollow hum,
 It neared as if the Devil was in it.                            _65

 14.
 The Devil WAS in it:--he had bought
 Peter for half-a-crown; and when
 The storm which bore him vanished, nought
 That in the house that storm had caught
 Was ever seen again.                                            _70

 15.
 The gaping neighbours came next day--
 They found all vanished from the shore:
 The Bible, whence he used to pray,
 Half scorched under a hen-coop lay;
 Smashed glass--and nothing more!                                _75


 PART 2.

 THE DEVIL.

 1.
 The Devil, I safely can aver,
 Has neither hoof, nor tail, nor sting;
 Nor is he, as some sages swear,
 A spirit, neither here nor there,
 In nothing--yet in everything.                                  _80

 2.
 He is--what we are; for sometimes
 The Devil is a gentleman;
 At others a bard bartering rhymes
 For sack; a statesman spinning crimes;
 A swindler, living as he can;                                   _85

 3.
 A thief, who cometh in the night,
 With whole boots and net pantaloons,
 Like some one whom it were not right
 To mention;--or the luckless wight
 From whom he steals nine silver spoons.                         _90

 4.
 But in this case he did appear
 Like a slop-merchant from Wapping,
 And with smug face, and eye severe,
 On every side did perk and peer
 Till he saw Peter dead or napping.                              _95

 5.
 He had on an upper Benjamin
 (For he was of the driving schism)
 In the which he wrapped his skin
 From the storm he travelled in,
 For fear of rheumatism.                                         _100

 6.
 He called the ghost out of the corse;--
 It was exceedingly like Peter,--
 Only its voice was hollow and hoarse--
 It had a queerish look of course--
 Its dress too was a little neater.                              _105

 7.
 The Devil knew not his name and lot;
 Peter knew not that he was Bell:
 Each had an upper stream of thought,
 Which made all seem as it was not;
 Fitting itself to all things well.                              _110

 8.
 Peter thought he had parents dear,
 Brothers, sisters, cousins, cronies,
 In the fens of Lincolnshire;
 He perhaps had found them there
 Had he gone and boldly shown his                                _115

 9.
 Solemn phiz in his own village;
 Where he thought oft when a boy
 He'd clomb the orchard walls to pillage
 The produce of his neighbour's tillage,
 With marvellous pride and joy.                                  _120

 10.
 And the Devil thought he had,
 'Mid the misery and confusion
 Of an unjust war, just made
 A fortune by the gainful trade
 Of giving soldiers rations bad--                                _125
 The world is full of strange delusion--

 11.
 That he had a mansion planned
 In a square like Grosvenor Square,
 That he was aping fashion, and
 That he now came to Westmoreland                                _130
 To see what was romantic there.

 12.
 And all this, though quite ideal,--
 Ready at a breath to vanish,--
 Was a state not more unreal
 Than the peace he could not feel,                               _135
 Or the care he could not banish.

 13.
 After a little conversation,
 The Devil told Peter, if he chose,
 He'd bring him to the world of fashion
 By giving him a situation                                       _140
 In his own service--and new clothes.

 14.
 And Peter bowed, quite pleased and proud,
 And after waiting some few days
 For a new livery--dirty yellow
 Turned up with black--the wretched fellow                       _145
 Was bowled to Hell in the Devil's chaise.


 PART 3.

 HELL.

 1.
 Hell is a city much like London--
 A populous and a smoky city;
 There are all sorts of people undone,
 And there is little or no fun done;                             _150
 Small justice shown, and still less pity.

 2.
 There is a Castles, and a Canning,
 A Cobbett, and a Castlereagh;
 All sorts of caitiff corpses planning
 All sorts of cozening for trepanning                            _155
 Corpses less corrupt than they.

 3.
 There is a ***, who has lost
 His wits, or sold them, none knows which;
 He walks about a double ghost,
 And though as thin as Fraud almost--                            _160
 Ever grows more grim and rich.

 4.
 There is a Chancery Court; a King;
 A manufacturing mob; a set
 Of thieves who by themselves are sent
 Similar thieves to represent;                                   _165
 An army; and a public debt.

 5.
 Which last is a scheme of paper money,
 And means--being interpreted--
 'Bees, keep your wax--give us the honey,
 And we will plant, while skies are sunny,                       _170
 Flowers, which in winter serve instead.'

 6.
 There is a great talk of revolution--
 And a great chance of despotism--
 German soldiers--camps--confusion--
 Tumults--lotteries--rage--delusion--                            _175
 Gin--suicide--and methodism;

 7.
 Taxes too, on wine and bread,
 And meat, and beer, and tea, and cheese,
 From which those patriots pure are fed,
 Who gorge before they reel to bed                               _180
 The tenfold essence of all these.

 8.
 There are mincing women, mewing,
 (Like cats, who amant misere,)
 Of their own virtue, and pursuing
 Their gentler sisters to that ruin,                             _185
 Without which--what were chastity?

 9.
 Lawyers--judges--old hobnobbers
 Are there--bailiffs--chancellors--
 Bishops--great and little robbers--
 Rhymesters--pamphleteers--stock-jobbers--                       _190
 Men of glory in the wars,--

 10.
 Things whose trade is, over ladies
 To lean, and flirt, and stare, and simper,
 Till all that is divine in woman
 Grows cruel, courteous, smooth, inhuman,                        _195
 Crucified 'twixt a smile and whimper.

 11.
 Thrusting, toiling, wailing, moiling,
 Frowning, preaching--such a riot!
 Each with never-ceasing labour,
 Whilst he thinks he cheats his neighbour,                       _200
 Cheating his own heart of quiet.

 12.
 And all these meet at levees;--
 Dinners convivial and political;--
 Suppers of epic poets;--teas,
 Where small talk dies in agonies;--                             _205
 Breakfasts professional and critical;

 13.
 Lunches and snacks so aldermanic
 That one would furnish forth ten dinners,
 Where reigns a Cretan-tongued panic,
 Lest news Russ, Dutch, or Alemannic                             _210
 Should make some losers, and some winners--

 45.
 At conversazioni--balls--
 Conventicles--and drawing-rooms--
 Courts of law--committees--calls
 Of a morning--clubs--book-stalls--                              _215
 Churches--masquerades--and tombs.


 15.
 And this is Hell--and in this smother
 All are damnable and damned;
 Each one damning, damns the other;
 They are damned by one another,                                 _220
 By none other are they damned.

 16.
 'Tis a lie to say, 'God damns'!
 Where was Heaven's Attorney General
 When they first gave out such flams?
 Let there be an end of shams,                                   _225
 They are mines of poisonous mineral.

 17.
 Statesmen damn themselves to be
 Cursed; and lawyers damn their souls
 To the auction of a fee;
 Churchmen damn themselves to see                                _230
 God's sweet love in burning coals.

 18.
 The rich are damned, beyond all cure,
 To taunt, and starve, and trample on
 The weak and wretched; and the poor
 Damn their broken hearts to endure                              _235
 Stripe on stripe, with groan on groan.

 19.
 Sometimes the poor are damned indeed
 To take,--not means for being blessed,--
 But Cobbett's snuff, revenge; that weed
 From which the worms that it doth feed                          _240
 Squeeze less than they before possessed.

 20.
 And some few, like we know who,
 Damned--but God alone knows why--
 To believe their minds are given
 To make this ugly Hell a Heaven;                                _245
 In which faith they live and die.

 21.
 Thus, as in a town, plague-stricken,
 Each man be he sound or no
 Must indifferently sicken;
 As when day begins to thicken,                                  _250
 None knows a pigeon from a crow,--

 22.
 So good and bad, sane and mad,
 The oppressor and the oppressed;
 Those who weep to see what others
 Smile to inflict upon their brothers;                           _255
 Lovers, haters, worst and best;

 23.
 All are damned--they breathe an air,
 Thick, infected, joy-dispelling:
 Each pursues what seems most fair,
 Mining like moles, through mind, and there                      _260
 Scoop palace-caverns vast, where Care
 In throned state is ever dwelling.


 PART 4.

 SIN.

 1.
 Lo. Peter in Hell's Grosvenor Square,
 A footman in the Devil's service!
 And the misjudging world would swear                            _265
 That every man in service there
 To virtue would prefer vice.

 2.
 But Peter, though now damned, was not
 What Peter was before damnation.
 Men oftentimes prepare a lot                                    _270
 Which ere it finds them, is not what
 Suits with their genuine station.

 3.
 All things that Peter saw and felt
 Had a peculiar aspect to him;
 And when they came within the belt                              _275
 Of his own nature, seemed to melt,
 Like cloud to cloud, into him.

 4.
 And so the outward world uniting
 To that within him, he became
 Considerably uninviting                                         _280
 To those who, meditation slighting,
 Were moulded in a different frame.

 5.
 And he scorned them, and they scorned him;
 And he scorned all they did; and they
 Did all that men of their own trim                              _285
 Are wont to do to please their whim,
 Drinking, lying, swearing, play.

 6.
 Such were his fellow-servants; thus
 His virtue, like our own, was built
 Too much on that indignant fuss                                 _290
 Hypocrite Pride stirs up in us
 To bully one another's guilt.

 7.
 He had a mind which was somehow
 At once circumference and centre
 Of all he might or feel or know;                                _295
 Nothing went ever out, although
 Something did ever enter.

 8.
 He had as much imagination
 As a pint-pot;--he never could
 Fancy another situation,                                        _300
 From which to dart his contemplation,
 Than that wherein he stood.

 9.
 Yet his was individual mind,
 And new created all he saw
 In a new manner, and refined                                    _305
 Those new creations, and combined
 Them, by a master-spirit's law.

 10.
 Thus--though unimaginative--
 An apprehension clear, intense,
 Of his mind's work, had made alive                              _310
 The things it wrought on; I believe
 Wakening a sort of thought in sense.

 11.
 But from the first 'twas Peter's drift
 To be a kind of moral eunuch,
 He touched the hem of Nature's shift,                           _315
 Felt faint--and never dared uplift
 The closest, all-concealing tunic.

 12.
 She laughed the while, with an arch smile,
 And kissed him with a sister's kiss,
 And said--My best Diogenes,                                     _320
 I love you well--but, if you please,
 Tempt not again my deepest bliss.

 13.
 ''Tis you are cold--for I, not coy,
 Yield love for love, frank, warm, and true;
 And Burns, a Scottish peasant boy--                             _325
 His errors prove it--knew my joy
 More, learned friend, than you.

 14.
 'Boeca bacciata non perde ventura,
 Anzi rinnuova come fa la luna:--
 So thought Boccaccio, whose sweet words might cure a            a
 Male prude, like you, from what you now endure, a
 Low-tide in soul, like a stagnant laguna.

 15.
 Then Peter rubbed his eyes severe.
 And smoothed his spacious forehead down
 With his broad palm;--'twixt love and fear,                     _335
 He looked, as he no doubt felt, queer,
 And in his dream sate down.

 16.
 The Devil was no uncommon creature;
 A leaden-witted thief--just huddled
 Out of the dross and scum of nature;                            _340
 A toad-like lump of limb and feature,
 With mind, and heart, and fancy muddled.

 17.
 He was that heavy, dull, cold thing,
 The spirit of evil well may be:
 A drone too base to have a sting;                               _345
 Who gluts, and grimes his lazy wing,
 And calls lust, luxury.

 18.
 Now he was quite the kind of wight
 Round whom collect, at a fixed aera,
 Venison, turtle, hock, and claret,--                            _350
 Good cheer--and those who come to share it--
 And best East Indian madeira!

 19.
 It was his fancy to invite
 Men of science, wit, and learning,
 Who came to lend each other light;                              _355
 He proudly thought that his gold's might
 Had set those spirits burning.

 20.
 And men of learning, science, wit,
 Considered him as you and I
 Think of some rotten tree, and sit                              _360
 Lounging and dining under it,
 Exposed to the wide sky.

 21.
 And all the while with loose fat smile,
 The willing wretch sat winking there,
 Believing 'twas his power that made                             _365
 That jovial scene--and that all paid
 Homage to his unnoticed chair.

 22.
 Though to be sure this place was Hell;
 He was the Devil--and all they--
 What though the claret circled well,                            _370
 And wit, like ocean, rose and fell?--
 Were damned eternally.


 PART 5.

 GRACE.

 1.
 Among the guests who often stayed
 Till the Devil's petits-soupers,
 A man there came, fair as a maid,                               _375
 And Peter noted what he said,
 Standing behind his master's chair.

 2.
 He was a mighty poet--and
 A subtle-souled psychologist;
 All things he seemed to understand,                             _380
 Of old or new--of sea or land--
 But his own mind--which was a mist.

 3.
 This was a man who might have turned
 Hell into Heaven--and so in gladness
 A Heaven unto himself have earned;                              _385
 But he in shadows undiscerned
 Trusted.--and damned himself to madness.

 4.
 He spoke of poetry, and how
 'Divine it was--a light--a love--
 A spirit which like wind doth blow                              _390
 As it listeth, to and fro;
 A dew rained down from God above;

 5.
 'A power which comes and goes like dream,
 And which none can ever trace--
 Heaven's light on earth--Truth's brightest beam.'               _395
 And when he ceased there lay the gleam
 Of those words upon his face.

 6.
 Now Peter, when he heard such talk,
 Would, heedless of a broken pate,
 Stand like a man asleep, or balk                                _400
 Some wishing guest of knife or fork,
 Or drop and break his master's plate.

 7.
 At night he oft would start and wake
 Like a lover, and began
 In a wild measure songs to make                                 _405
 On moor, and glen, and rocky lake,
 And on the heart of man--

 8.
 And on the universal sky--
 And the wide earth's bosom green,--
 And the sweet, strange mystery                                  _410
 Of what beyond these things may lie,
 And yet remain unseen.

 9.
 For in his thought he visited
 The spots in which, ere dead and damned,
 He his wayward life had led;                                    _415
 Yet knew not whence the thoughts were fed
 Which thus his fancy crammed.

 10.
 And these obscure remembrances
 Stirred such harmony in Peter,
 That, whensoever he should please,                              _420
 He could speak of rocks and trees
 In poetic metre.

 11.
 For though it was without a sense
 Of memory, yet he remembered well
 Many a ditch and quick-set fence;                               _425
 Of lakes he had intelligence,
 He knew something of heath and fell.

 12.
 He had also dim recollections
 Of pedlars tramping on their rounds;
 Milk-pans and pails; and odd collections                        _430
 Of saws, and proverbs; and reflections
 Old parsons make in burying-grounds.

 13.
 But Peter's verse was clear, and came
 Announcing from the frozen hearth
 Of a cold age, that none might tame                             _435
 The soul of that diviner flame
 It augured to the Earth:

 14.
 Like gentle rains, on the dry plains,
 Making that green which late was gray,
 Or like the sudden moon, that stains                            _440
 Some gloomy chamber's window-panes
 With a broad light like day.

 15.
 For language was in Peter's hand
 Like clay while he was yet a potter;
 And he made songs for all the land,                             _445
 Sweet both to feel and understand,
 As pipkins late to mountain Cotter.

 16.
 And Mr. --, the bookseller,
 Gave twenty pounds for some;--then scorning
 A footman's yellow coat to wear,                                _450
 Peter, too proud of heart, I fear,
 Instantly gave the Devil warning.

 17.
 Whereat the Devil took offence,
 And swore in his soul a great oath then,
 'That for his damned impertinence                               _455
 He'd bring him to a proper sense
 Of what was due to gentlemen!'


 PART 6.

 DAMNATION.

 1.
 'O that mine enemy had written
 A book!'--cried Job:--a fearful curse,
 If to the Arab, as the Briton,                                  _460
 'Twas galling to be critic-bitten:--
 The Devil to Peter wished no worse.

 2.
 When Peter's next new book found vent,
 The Devil to all the first Reviews
 A copy of it slyly sent,                                        _465
 With five-pound note as compliment,
 And this short notice--'Pray abuse.'

 3.
 Then seriatim, month and quarter,
 Appeared such mad tirades.--One said--
 'Peter seduced Mrs. Foy's daughter,                             _470
 Then drowned the mother in Ullswater,
 The last thing as he went to bed.'

 4.
 Another--'Let him shave his head!
 Where's Dr. Willis?--Or is he joking?
 What does the rascal mean or hope,                              _475
 No longer imitating Pope,
 In that barbarian Shakespeare poking?'

 5.
 One more, 'Is incest not enough?
 And must there be adultery too?
 Grace after meat? Miscreant and Liar!                           _480
 Thief! Blackguard! Scoundrel! Fool! hell-fire
 Is twenty times too good for you.

 6.
 'By that last book of yours WE think
 You've double damned yourself to scorn;
 We warned you whilst yet on the brink                           _485
 You stood. From your black name will shrink
 The babe that is unborn.'

 7.
 All these Reviews the Devil made
 Up in a parcel, which he had
 Safely to Peter's house conveyed.                               _490
 For carriage, tenpence Peter paid--
 Untied them--read them--went half mad.

 8.
 'What!' cried he, 'this is my reward
 For nights of thought, and days, of toil?
 Do poets, but to be abhorred                                    _495
 By men of whom they never heard,
 Consume their spirits' oil?

 9.
 'What have I done to them?--and who
 IS Mrs. Foy? 'Tis very cruel
 To speak of me and Betty so!                                    _500
 Adultery! God defend me! Oh!
 I've half a mind to fight a duel.

 10.
 'Or,' cried he, a grave look collecting,
 'Is it my genius, like the moon,
 Sets those who stand her face inspecting,                       _505
 That face within their brain reflecting,
 Like a crazed bell-chime, out of tune?'

 11.
 For Peter did not know the town,
 But thought, as country readers do,
 For half a guinea or a crown,                                   _510
 He bought oblivion or renown
 From God's own voice in a review.

 12.
 All Peter did on this occasion
 Was, writing some sad stuff in prose.
 It is a dangerous invasion                                      _515
 When poets criticize; their station
 Is to delight, not pose.

 13.
 The Devil then sent to Leipsic fair
 For Born's translation of Kant's book;
 A world of words, tail foremost, where                          _520
 Right--wrong--false--true--and foul--and fair
 As in a lottery-wheel are shook.

 14.
 Five thousand crammed octavo pages
 Of German psychologics,--he
 Who his furor verborum assuages                                 _525
 Thereon, deserves just seven months' wages
 More than will e'er be due to me.

 15.
 I looked on them nine several days,
 And then I saw that they were bad;
 A friend, too, spoke in their dispraise,--                      _530
 He never read them;--with amaze
 I found Sir William Drummond had.

 16.
 When the book came, the Devil sent
 It to P. Verbovale, Esquire,
 With a brief note of compliment,                                _535
 By that night's Carlisle mail. It went,
 And set his soul on fire.

 17.
 Fire, which ex luce praebens fumum,
 Made him beyond the bottom see
 Of truth's clear well--when I and you, Ma'am,                   _540
 Go, as we shall do, subter humum,
 We may know more than he.

 18.
 Now Peter ran to seed in soul
 Into a walking paradox;
 For he was neither part nor whole,                              _545
 Nor good, nor bad--nor knave nor fool;
 --Among the woods and rocks

 19.
 Furious he rode, where late he ran,
 Lashing and spurring his tame hobby;
 Turned to a formal puritan,                                     _550
 A solemn and unsexual man,--
 He half believed "White Obi".

 20.
 This steed in vision he would ride,
 High trotting over nine-inch bridges,
 With Flibbertigibbet, imp of pride,                             _555
 Mocking and mowing by his side--
 A mad-brained goblin for a guide--
 Over corn-fields, gates, and hedges.

 21.
 After these ghastly rides, he came
 Home to his heart, and found from thence                        _560
 Much stolen of its accustomed flame;
 His thoughts grew weak, drowsy, and lame
 Of their intelligence.

 22.
 To Peter's view, all seemed one hue;
 He was no Whig, he was no Tory;                                 _565
 No Deist and no Christian he;--
 He got so subtle, that to be
 Nothing, was all his glory.

 23.
 One single point in his belief
 From his organization sprung,                                   _570
 The heart-enrooted faith, the chief
 Ear in his doctrines' blighted sheaf,
 That 'Happiness is wrong';

 24.
 So thought Calvin and Dominic;
 So think their fierce successors, who                           _575
 Even now would neither stint nor stick
 Our flesh from off our bones to pick,
 If they might 'do their do.'

 25.
 His morals thus were undermined:--
 The old Peter--the hard, old Potter--                           _580
 Was born anew within his mind;
 He grew dull, harsh, sly, unrefined,
 As when he tramped beside the Otter.

 26.
 In the death hues of agony
 Lambently flashing from a fish,                                 _585
 Now Peter felt amused to see
 Shades like a rainbow's rise and flee,
 Mixed with a certain hungry wish.

 27.
 So in his Country's dying face
 He looked--and, lovely as she lay,                              _590
 Seeking in vain his last embrace,
 Wailing her own abandoned case,
 With hardened sneer he turned away:

 28.
 And coolly to his own soul said;--
 'Do you not think that we might make                            _595
 A poem on her when she's dead:--
 Or, no--a thought is in my head--
 Her shroud for a new sheet I'll take:

 29.
 'My wife wants one.--Let who will bury
 This mangled corpse! And I and you,                             _600
 My dearest Soul, will then make merry,
 As the Prince Regent did with Sherry,--'
 'Ay--and at last desert me too.'

 30.
 And so his Soul would not be gay,
 But moaned within him; like a fawn                              _605
 Moaning within a cave, it lay
 Wounded and wasting, day by day,
 Till all its life of life was gone.

 31.
 As troubled skies stain waters clear,
 The storm in Peter's heart and mind                             _610
 Now made his verses dark and queer:
 They were the ghosts of what they were,
 Shaking dim grave-clothes in the wind.

 32.
 For he now raved enormous folly,
 Of Baptisms, Sunday-schools, and Graves,                        _615
 'Twould make George Colman melancholy
 To have heard him, like a male Molly,
 Chanting those stupid staves.

 33.
 Yet the Reviews, who heaped abuse
 On Peter while he wrote for freedom,                            _620
 So soon as in his song they spy
 The folly which soothes tyranny,
 Praise him, for those who feed 'em.

 34.
 'He was a man, too great to scan;--
 A planet lost in truth's keen rays:--                           _625
 His virtue, awful and prodigious;--
 He was the most sublime, religious,
 Pure-minded Poet of these days.'

 35.
 As soon as he read that, cried Peter,
 'Eureka! I have found the way                                   _630
 To make a better thing of metre
 Than e'er was made by living creature
 Up to this blessed day.'

 36.
 Then Peter wrote odes to the Devil;--
 In one of which he meekly said:                                 _635
 'May Carnage and Slaughter,
 Thy niece and thy daughter,
 May Rapine and Famine,
 Thy gorge ever cramming,
 Glut thee with living and dead!                                 _640

 37.
 'May Death and Damnation,
 And Consternation,
 Flit up from Hell with pure intent!
 Slash them at Manchester,
 Glasgow, Leeds, and Chester;                                    _645
 Drench all with blood from Avon to Trent.

 38.
 'Let thy body-guard yeomen
 Hew down babes and women,
 And laugh with bold triumph till Heaven be rent!
 When Moloch in Jewry                                            _650
 Munched children with fury,
 It was thou, Devil, dining with pure intent.


 PART 7.

 DOUBLE DAMNATION.

 1.
 The Devil now knew his proper cue.--
 Soon as he read the ode, he drove
 To his friend Lord MacMurderchouse's,                           _655
 A man of interest in both houses,
 And said:--'For money or for love,

 2.
 'Pray find some cure or sinecure;
 To feed from the superfluous taxes
 A friend of ours--a poet--fewer                                 _660
 Have fluttered tamer to the lure
 Than he.' His lordship stands and racks his

 3.
 Stupid brains, while one might count
 As many beads as he had boroughs,--
 At length replies; from his mean front,                         _665
 Like one who rubs out an account,
 Smoothing away the unmeaning furrows:

 4.
 'It happens fortunately, dear Sir,
 I can. I hope I need require
 No pledge from you, that he will stir                           _670
 In our affairs;--like Oliver.
 That he'll be worthy of his hire.'

 5.
 These words exchanged, the news sent off
 To Peter, home the Devil hied,--
 Took to his bed; he had no cough,                               _675
 No doctor,--meat and drink enough.--
 Yet that same night he died.

 6.
 The Devil's corpse was leaded down;
 His decent heirs enjoyed his pelf,
 Mourning-coaches, many a one,                                   _680
 Followed his hearse along the town:--
 Where was the Devil himself?

 7.
 When Peter heard of his promotion,
 His eyes grew like two stars for bliss:
 There was a bow of sleek devotion                               _685
 Engendering in his back; each motion
 Seemed a Lord's shoe to kiss.

 8.
 He hired a house, bought plate, and made
 A genteel drive up to his door,
 With sifted gravel neatly laid,--                               _690
 As if defying all who said,
 Peter was ever poor.

 9.
 But a disease soon struck into
 The very life and soul of Peter--
 He walked about--slept--had the hue                             _695
 Of health upon his cheeks--and few
 Dug better--none a heartier eater.

 10.
 And yet a strange and horrid curse
 Clung upon Peter, night and day;
 Month after month the thing grew worse,                         _700
 And deadlier than in this my verse
 I can find strength to say.

 11.
 Peter was dull--he was at first
 Dull--oh, so dull--so very dull!
 Whether he talked, wrote, or rehearsed--                        _705
 Still with this dulness was he cursed--
 Dull--beyond all conception--dull.

 12.
 No one could read his books--no mortal,
 But a few natural friends, would hear him;
 The parson came not near his portal;                            _710
 His state was like that of the immortal
 Described by Swift--no man could bear him.

 13.
 His sister, wife, and children yawned,
 With a long, slow, and drear ennui,
 All human patience far beyond;                                  _715
 Their hopes of Heaven each would have pawned,
 Anywhere else to be.

 14.
 But in his verse, and in his prose,
 The essence of his dulness was
 Concentred and compressed so close,                             _720
 'Twould have made Guatimozin doze
 On his red gridiron of brass.

 15.
 A printer's boy, folding those pages,
 Fell slumbrously upon one side;
 Like those famed Seven who slept three ages.                    _725
 To wakeful frenzy's vigil--rages,
 As opiates, were the same applied.

 16.
 Even the Reviewers who were hired
 To do the work of his reviewing,
 With adamantine nerves, grew tired;--                           _730
 Gaping and torpid they retired,
 To dream of what they should be doing.

 17.
 And worse and worse, the drowsy curse
 Yawned in him, till it grew a pest--
 A wide contagious atmosphere,                                   _735
 Creeping like cold through all things near;
 A power to infect and to infest.

 18.
 His servant-maids and dogs grew dull;
 His kitten, late a sportive elf;
 The woods and lakes, so beautiful,                              _740
 Of dim stupidity were full.
 All grew dull as Peter's self.

 19.
 The earth under his feet--the springs,
 Which lived within it a quick life,
 The air, the winds of many wings,                               _745
 That fan it with new murmurings,
 Were dead to their harmonious strife.

 20.
 The birds and beasts within the wood,
 The insects, and each creeping thing,
 Were now a silent multitude;                                    _750
 Love's work was left unwrought--no brood
 Near Peter's house took wing.

 21.
 And every neighbouring cottager
 Stupidly yawned upon the other:
 No jackass brayed; no little cur                                _755
 Cocked up his ears;--no man would stir
 To save a dying mother.

 22.
 Yet all from that charmed district went
 But some half-idiot and half-knave,
 Who rather than pay any rent,                                   _760
 Would live with marvellous content,
 Over his father's grave.

 23.
 No bailiff dared within that space,
 For fear of the dull charm, to enter;
 A man would bear upon his face,                                 _765
 For fifteen months in any case,
 The yawn of such a venture.

 24.
 Seven miles above--below--around--
 This pest of dulness holds its sway;
 A ghastly life without a sound;                                 _770
 To Peter's soul the spell is bound--
 How should it ever pass away?








The Project Gutenberg Etext of Peter Bell the Third, by Percy Bysshe Shelley
************This file should be named ptbll10.txt or ptbll10.zip************

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, ptbll11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, ptbll10a.txt

Produced by Sue Asscher <asschers@dingoblue.net.au>

More information about this book is at the top of this file.

We are now trying to release all our etexts one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
etexts, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

The most recent list of states, along with all methods for donations
(including credit card donations and international donations), may be
found online at http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*

End of Project Gutenberg's Peter Bell the Third, by Percy Bysshe Shelley

